The Story of how I built a Model
================================

So in this text, I will actually build a very simple Webapp including data
that is stored on the server. I will not use a database, so as not to
complicate things. 

The project is the following: I like to write stories in my free time, but
with my notes all over time and space (I don't know, where they're
getting lost), it gets quite annoying. Also the notes are completely
disorganized, but that we will fix later.

So the idea is to have a web application that stores my stories. For now, lets
assume, that the stories only have a title and a body.

In ruby, classes don't need no stupid type declarations, you just call it
`@variablename` and the '@' tells us that it has instance scope and the
variable can hold a string, a number, or any object. Similarily
`@@classvariable` has class scope. The first, we won't even see, because Ruby
can define getters and setters automatically with the `attr_accessor`
function, to which you give _symbols_ - strings that signify a name. The
minimal class, that has a publicly accessable text and title is

```ruby
class Text
  attr_accessor :text, :title
end
```

But we want a constructor, which is called `initialize` in ruby and some
management of all the entities, e.g. displaying all Texts.

The constructor only passes the arguments to the setters:

```ruby
class Text
  attr_accessor :text, :title

  def initialize( title, text )
    self.text  = text
    self.title = title
  end
  
  # ...
end
```

`def` defines methods (or functions) in the current scope and `self` is
*always* bound to the current object.

Now we need a class scoped set of all the Texts, preferably only the ones we
save (think of tests, where we generate Texts that should not appear in the
set).

```ruby
class Text
  # ...
  @@texts = []
  
  def save
    @@texts << self unless @@texts.include? self
  end
end
```

Ok, that's a bit to digest:

* `@@texts = []` initializes the class scoped variable with an empty list
	literal.
* `save` does not take any arguments, we don't need to write the parens in
	method declarations.
* The shift operator adds the element to the list.
* The postfix `unless` (or `if`) is an idiomatic way to write one-line
	conditional statements. It is equivalent to 
  ```ruby
    unless @@texts.include? self
      @@texts << self
    end
  ```
  but is much more readable.
* `include?` is a valid method name and indeed idiomatic for predicates
	(methods, that return true or false). Again, you don't need to write the
  parens on the method calls (fun fact: attr_accessor is a method too).

That said, the delete method should be simple

```ruby
class Text
  # ...
  def delete
    @@texts.delete self
  end
  
  def self.all
    @@texts
  end
end
```

but the `all` method needs some explaining again:

* Remember how `self` is *always* bound to the current object? In the body of
	a class, that object is the class you're currently defining! That's why
  `def self.all` defines the method `all` in the class, not the instances.

Finally, lets add a unique identifier with what we have learned:

```ruby
class Text
  attr_accessor :text, :title
  
  @@text_count = 0
  
  def initialize( title, text )
    self.title = title
    self.text = text
    @id = @@text_count
    @@text_count += 1
  end
  
  def id
    @id
  end

  # ...
end
```

and add a lookup:

```ruby
  def self.by_id id
    @@texts.detect {|txt| txt.id == id}
  end
```

* The `detect` method takes a block, that is an executable part of code. This
	block is evaluated and the method returns the first element, for which the
  block returns `true`. In the same fashion, there are
  - `select`: returns a list of all the elements, for which the block is true.
  - `collect`: returns a list of all the return values for the block executed
    on the elements
  - `inject`: ... Lets not get into [that][fold].

[fold]: <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fold_(higher-order_function)>

This is all there is to do for the model part.

Now we can present that with Sinatra, we need to require the models file as
well and pass the variables.

```ruby
require 'rubygems'
require 'sinatra'
require './models.rb'

get "/" do
  haml :index, :locals => {:texts => Text.all}
end

get "/text/:id" do
	text = Text.by_id(params[:id].to_i)
  
  return 404 if text.nil?

  haml :show, :locals => {:text => text}
end
```

* Note that I converted the parameter `id` to an integer before handing it to
	the ```#by_id``` method.
* I can return the 'not found' code 404 directly, if... well... I didn't find
	the text with the id.
* We can extract parameters from a `get` request (or any request really), by
	marking the variable with a colon (like a symbol).

Finally, we can display all that with two haml files:

```haml 
# index.haml
%ul
  - for text in texts
    %li
      %a( href="/text/#{text.id}" )= text.title
```

This displays links to all texts in an unsorted list showing their title.

* In a ruby string, you can put a ruby expression between `#{` and `}`, and it
	will insert the value into the string.
* In HAML, you can define attributes of a block (in this example `a`) by
	putting them in parens. The right hand side of the equal signs are ruby
  expressions.

Finally, we need to add a file to show a single text:

```haml 
# show.haml
%h1
  = text.title
%div
  :markdown
    #{text.text}
```

* In HAML, when we prepose a paragraph with a filter name, like `markdown`,
	then that is processed through that. Note however, that prefixing something
  with `=` does no longer insert it.

Of course, if we run that program, it will not show anything, in lack of any
texts and also a way to add them. For the moment, we can fix that by adding a
_fixture_ to the controller file:

```ruby
require 'rubygems'
require 'sinatra'
require 'rdiscount'
require './models.rb'

Text.new("Humpty Dumpty", "Humpty Dumpty sat on the wall...").save

get "/" do
  haml :index, :locals => {:texts => Text.all}
end

get "/text/:id" do
	text = Text.by_id(params[:id].to_i)

	return 404 if text.nil?

  haml :show, :locals => {:text => text}
end
```

* Ruby objects are initialized by the `#new` method of the class, which in
	turn runs the `#initialize` method of the new object.
* There is no magic "fixture" file, the fixture is just some code that adds
	objects to the collection.
