# Putting, Modifying and the REST

Until now, the texts had to be hard coded into the fixture. That of course is
just ridiculous for a webapp. The whole point of an application like this is
that it is interactive, so that I can publish my own texts, modify my old ones
and delete the garbage.

As you might know, the HTTP has four main verbs:

* _GET_: A content is shown, no modification should occur.
* _POST_: Modify a content by sending the server information.
* _PUT_: Create new content on the server
* _DELETE_: What do you think?

There are some others, but these four help you design your interface. For
example, our application manages texts, so the following requests should be
possible:

* `GET /text` should display a list of all texts.
* `PUT /text` should publish a new text.
* `GET /text/:id` should display the text with the given id.
* `POST /text/:id` should modify the text.
* `DELETE /text/:id` ...What do you think?

Using only meaningful URLs and HTTP methods and not cookies, etc, to navigate
the user through the site is known as
[REST](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Representational_state_transfer).
Not only does it give an simple interface, it also helps performance, etc.
Putting a cool new name on it like "REST" on it hides the fact, that this was
how the makers of HTTP imagined the web all along.

Sinatra is RESTful by default, but of course, you have to take care of the
URLs yourself. The last time, we defined the two `GET` methods, so lets add
publishing a new text first:

```ruby
put "/text" do
  text = Text.new(params[:title], params[:text])
  text.save
end
```

Pretty easy, huh? The `params` will come from a form, but that's not our
problem now.

Next, we can post changes:

```ruby
post "/text/:id" do
	text = Text.by_id(params[:id].to_i)
  
	return 404 if text.nil?

  text.title, text.text = params[:title], params[:text]
end
```

This mixes the two sources for `params`.

```
delete "/text/:id" do
	text = Text.by_id(params[:id].to_i)
  
	return 404 if text.nil?
  
  text.delete
end
```

Ok, _now_ we can face the problem, that we can't actually access these
methods, since we don't have a form for the editing part yet.

First of all, we notice that it would be stupid to write the same form twice -
once for the editing and once for the creating. We'd prefer to just show the
same form. This problem can be solved with _partials_: basically, we insert a
HAML call into the HAML template. Define a HAML file `form.haml`, and use it
from both `new.haml` and `edit.haml`.

```haml
# form.haml

%form(action = actionurl method = "POST")
  %input(type='hidden' name="_method" value="put")
  %label
    Title:
    %input(type='text' name="title" value="#{title}")
  %label
    Text:
    %input(type='textarea' name="text" value="#{text}")
  %input(type='submit')

# edit.haml

%h1
  Edit
  %q= @text.title
= haml :form, :locals => {:title =>  @text.title, :text => @text.text, :actionurl => "/text/#{@text.id}"}

# new.haml

%h1 New Txt
= haml :form, :locals => {:title =>  "", :text => "", :actionurl => "/text"}
```

You might be wondering, what the heck the line 

```haml
%input(type='hidden' name="_method" value="put")
```

is about. Fun fact: Browsers can't use `PUT` or `DELETE`. It's embarrassing
but true. The fix is the following: We sent a `POST`, which tells the server
that it actually should have been a `PUT` method. Sinatra understands this and
translates.

We need to add URLs for the form of course, for example 

```haml
get "/text/new" do
	haml :new
end

get "text/:id/edit" do
	@text = Text.by_id(params[:id].to_i)

	haml :edit
end
```
* Instead of adding `:locals`, you can also define instance variables. This is
	often preferable.

There is only putting the respective links into the views:

```haml
# index.haml
%ul
  - for text in texts
    %li
      %a( href="/text/#{text.id}" )= text.title
%a( href="/text/new" ) new text

# show.haml
%h1
  = text.title
%div
  :markdown
    #{text.text}
%ul
  %li
    %a(href="/text/#{text.id}") edit
  %li
    %form(action="/text/#{text.id}" method="POST")
      %input(name ="_method" type="hidden" value="delete")
      %input(type="submit" value="delete")
```

* Note: The editing is straight forward, but the "delete" option again has a the
	hidden input, that tells Sinatra, that it is a `DELETE` call.

You should now know

* What REST is and how RESTful application typically build up their URLs.
* How to use partials.
* How to use the `PUT` and `DELETE` methods, even though browsers don't
	support it.
