# User Sessions and Layouts

The SinatraStory project now has a single model class, that is very simple and
allows everybody that can connect to the server to create and delete
everything. It seemed like a good idea at the time, but now it seems like an
even better idea would be to restrict access on a user basis. A user should
only be able to edit and delete their own texts.

This implementation is blatantly ripped off [Authentication with Sinatra](http://www.128bitstudios.com/2011/11/21/authentication-with-sinatra/).

First of all, we need a model for the user. Lets ignore the relation between
the user and the texts for the moment and focus on the login procedure. We
want the ability to sign up, to log in, and to log out. For this, we need some
new routes:

```ruby
get "/signup" do
  haml :signup
end

post "/signup" do
  # ... Create user ...
end

post "/login" do
  # ... Set current user ...
end

get "/logout" do
  # ... reset current user ...
end
```

Now the thing is, to save a login, we need something called a _session_. A
session is a piece of information stored on the server that relates to the
user, as such the user can not edit it. You might notice, that this is in
conflict to the REST principles, but still commonly done. To acknowledge that
this is not pure, we need to enable it:

```ruby
# controller.rb

# ...

enable :sessions

# ...
```

Next we can imagine how a login and logout procedures would look like:

```ruby
post "/login" do
  fail "No such login" unless User.login(params[:username], params[:password]) 
  
  session[:username] = params[:username]
  
  redirect back
end

get "/logout" do
  session[:username] = nil
  redirect back
end
```

* Failing is an option and gives an error page.
* The session looks like a dictionary.
* You can redirect to the last page visited.
* We store only the username in the session, because it takes
  less space.

Similiarly, on signup you should create an account if the name is available.
Normally, we should also send the password twice, if the user misstyped.

```ruby
post "/signup" do
  username, pw, pw2 = params[:username], params[:password], params[:password2]
  
  fail "Passwords not identical" if pw != pw2
  
  fail "User name not available" unless User.available? username
  
  User.new(username, pw).save
  
  session[:username] = username
  redirect "/"
end
```

The HAML file for this is left up as an exercise to the reader.

Now it would be nice to have a layout around every of our pages that could
include the login. Unfortunately, that's not how it works, we need to edit it
into every view file separately....

Just kidding. There is the `layout.haml` file, which is rendered around every
HAML file (partials not included). You can decide, where to put the inner page
by placing `= yield` at the respective point. 

This of course assumes, that there is exactly one point, which is filled in -
not very realistic: Typically, depending on the page, you would display
another page title or a slightly different sidebar. Sure, you could configure
it in the controller, but that would be awkward. Fortunately, there is a gem
that does that called `sinatra-outputbuffer` - accept no substitutes!
Seriously, I tried 3 gems that offered this and that was the only one that
seemed to work. If you `require 'sinatra/outputbuffer'` it, you can use the
commands ```content_for :some_name``` to fill a part and 
```yield_content :some_name``` to leave the gap open to be filled in.

With this, we can write a layout file:

```haml
!!! 5
%head
  %title
    SinatraStory - 
    = yield_content :title
%body
  %aside
    #user
      - if @user
        %b= @user.name
        %a(href = "/logout") logout
      - else
        %form(action="/login" method="POST")
          %label
            Username
            %input(type="text" name="username") 
          %label
            Password
            %input(type="password" name="password")
          %input(type="submit" value="login")
        %a( href="/signup" ) Sign up
  %article= yield
```

* `!!! 5` means it is converted to HTML 5.
* The title is set to "SinatraStory - <subpage title>"
* If `@user` is not nil, show the name and a logout link.
* If it is, show the signup link and a login field.
* Insert the bulk of the inner page into an `<article>`.

Now there's the user information on every page!

Or it were, if there was a `User` class.

At the moment that class should store the user name and the password
information. Hopefully, the recent news about all kind of password leaks
made you cautious enough never to store any passwords in plain text into a
database. *Never, ever store a password in plain text!* Yes, this is a toy
project, but if anybody copied this, it should at least be somewhat secure.
Always store passwords using a [hash function](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hash_function).

In the following I will use BCrypt, not because it is fast, but because it is
slow. A slow hash function ensures, that a brute force cracking attempt with a
known hash takes long enough.

Anyway, include the `bcrypt-ruby` gem and `require 'bcrypt'` in your
`models.rb` file. We don't want anyone to touch any of the attributes, so they
are read only. Besides the hash, we also generate a salt (a random value
basically).

```ruby
class User
  attr_reader :name, :password_hash, :password_salt

  @@users = {} # We store the users in a dictionary by user name.

  def self.all
    @@users
  end
  
  def self.by_name name
    @@users[name]
  end
  
  def self.available? name
    not @@users.has_key? name
  end
  
  def save
    raise "Duplicated user" if @@users.has_key? name and @@users[name] != self

    @@users[name] = self
  end
  
  # ...
end
```

* This is similar to the Text class and should only be a problem in that it
	uses a dictionary instead of a list.

However, it does not address the `initialize(name, password)` and the
`User.login(name, password)` methods.

These should use the hash function, so I show you how separately. On user
creation, we will take the password and generate a hash for it and only store
that in the model. When we `login`, we check that the passwords hash is the
same as the stored hash. Additionally, we add a random salt, so that two users
with the same password still have different hashes.

```ruby
def initialize(name, password)
  pw_salt = BCrypt::Engine.generate_salt
  pw_hash = BCrypt::Engine.hash_secret(password, pw_salt)
  @name = name
  @password_hash = pw_hash
  @password_salt = pw_salt
end

def self.login name, password
  user = @@users[name]
  
  return false if user.nil?
  
  user.password_hash == BCrypt::Engine.hash_secret(password, user.password_salt)
end
```

This way, even if your database was compromised and leaked, the users would be
relatively save.


That was the complicated part, the rest will not give anyone headaches. What
remains is to ensure, that texts are owned by someone and that only that
someone can edit them. Obviously we need to extend the `Text` class to have a
`User` it belongs to:

```ruby
# models.rb
class Text
  # ...
  attr_reader :user
  
  def initialize( title, text, user )
    # ...
    @user = user
  end

  def editable? user
    @user == user
  end
end
```

and the `User` to contain the texts:

```ruby
# models.rb
class User
  def initialize(...)
    @texts = {}
    # ...
  end
  
  def texts
    @texts.dup # use copy
  end

  def add_text( title, text )
    new_text = Text.new(title, text, self)
    @texts[new_text.id] = new_text
    new_text
  end

  def remove_text( id )
    deleted = @texts.delete(id)
  end
end
```

The controller should check if the action is allowed. We'll use the current
user (not the current user name) a lot, so it makes sense to fetch it before
anything else happens:

```ruby
# controller.rb

before do
  @user = User.by_name session[:username]
end
```

Now the controller needs to ensure, that a user might only do allowed
operations:

```ruby
post "/text/:id" do
	text = Text.by_id(params[:id].to_i)
  
	return 404 if text.nil?
	return 401 unless text.editable? @user

  text.title, text.text = params[:title], params[:text]

	redirect to("/text/#{text.id}")
end
```

and for creation the same. Finally, we can wrap 

```haml
- if text.editable? @user
  %ul
    %li
      %a(href="/text/#{text.id}/edit") edit
    %li
      %form(action="/text/#{text.id}" method="POST")
        %input(name ="_method" type="hidden" value="delete")
        %input(type="submit" value="delete")
```

and similarly for the "new text" link.

This adds some security to our page. You could now add a per user listing, a
profile for each user, ... but you could do that with what you already know.
Try it!


You should now know:

* What a session is and how to use it.
* How to use the `layout.haml` file
* How to use `yield_content` and `content_for`
* That you should *never* store plain text passwords and how to use a hash
	function with salt.
* How to make relations between model classes.
* Ensure that restricted operations are executed only with the valid user.
