# Testing

Up to this point, I always felt kinda bad, because I always had to start up the
server and go through all the pages in order to catch errors (there always are).
The solution to that is of course to automate that. Since I don't have a
clicking robot, I'll fake this by sending requests directly. This is possible
by the `rack` testing library. Also I will use the `rspec` testing library,
because it doubles as documentation, and provides the very handy `should`
method.

For structure, we use a different file, e.g. `tests.rb`:

```ruby
def relative(path)
  File.join(File.dirname(__FILE__), path)
end

require relative('controller.rb')

require 'rack/test'
include Rack::Test::Methods
```

Now the nice thing about `rspec` is that it looks very much like natural
language. First you say, what you test, then -- if you want -- you define
different contexts in which the thing you test can be, and finally, you say
what `it` should be able to do.

Lets start with unit-testing, so stick to one class for as long as you can.
For a User e.g. "Tom", we know that

* it can create texts
* it can be found by name
* it can remove texts by their id

Further, the database

* can tell if a user can login
* can list all users

And this is the structure of our test: 

```ruby
describe User do
  context "Tom" do
    it "can create texts" do
			...
    end

    it "can be found by his name" do
			...
    end

    it "can remove texts by id" do
			...
    end
  end

  context "Database" do
    it "can tell if a user can login" do
			...
    end

    it "can list all users" do
			...
    end
  end
end
```

Usually, we also want to create some conditions before the tests are run, for
example creating some users, ... We can do this with the `before` method which
comes in two flavours: `before(:all)`, which is executed before any of the
tests run, and `before(:each)`, which runs before each of the test methods.

For example, to set up the user "Tom", we can add this to the `context "Tom"`
block.

```ruby
    before(:all) do
      User.reset
      Text.reset
      @tom = User.new "Tom", "abc"
      @tom.save
    end
```

* We clear the whole database and then add `@tom` and save him.
* Similarly you can define an `after(:each)` or `after(:all)` call.

Now to implement `it "can create texts"`, we can assume, that this `@tom` is
given:

```ruby 
    it "can create texts" do
      text = @tom.add_text("Humpty", "Dumpty")
      text.user.should eq(@tom)
      @tom.texts.should eq([text])
    end
```

* every object has a `#should` method, that accepts matchers (you can look
	them up [here](http://rubydoc.info/gems/rspec-expectations/2.4.0/RSpec/Matchers).).
  You probably need `eq(...)` most often.
* You can invert the test by the ```#should_not``` method.

To describe the Server's abilities, we notice, that there is no class that we
describe. But `rspec` is forgiving and allows you to describe something by a
string name:

```ruby
describe "Server" do
  context "for unregistered users" do
    it "lists all text titles under /text" { }

    it "can show the full text under /text/:id" { }
  end

  context "for registered users" do
    it "accepts posts to /text as new text" { }

    it "deletes posts on /text/:id" { }

    it "updates posts on POST /text/:id" { }
  end
end
```

`rack/test` has not been included for nothing, it offers functions `get`,
`post`, ... that do requests to the localhost. To start the server, we need to
define an `app` method, which is then started before the tests run. At the
moment, we don't have a class for that, but we can provide the standard
Sinatra app.

```ruby
describe "Server" do
  def app
    Sinatra::Application
  end
  ...
end
```

A test could now look like this:

```ruby
    it "lists all text titles under /text" do
      get "/text"
      last_response.body.should include("Humpty")
      last_response.body.should_not include("Dumpty")
    end
```

* `get ...` sends a get request to the server and saves the response.
* ```last_response``` can then be used to extract information about the
	answer, for example, if the text of the response contains something.

Now to the parametrized requests:

```ruby
    it "accepts posts to /text as new text" do
      post "/text", :title => "The Cat", :text => "The cat sat on the mat"

      last_response.status.should == 302
      Text.all.collect(&:title).should include("The Cat")
    end
```

* You just add the parameters of the request as named parameters of the query. 
* You can test the response code of the query.
* You can be very concise in ruby. Basically, the last line says "'The Cat'
	should be among the titles of texts".

With these building blocks, you probably can figure out 90% of your testing
needs.
